GWEN IFILL: But, first, payday
lending is
a $46 billion industry in the
U.S. About 12
million Americans borrow more
than $7 billion
annually from over 22,000
storefronts.
But the industry's practices
have long been
under scrutiny.
Special correspondent Andrew
Schmertz has
the story from South Dakota,
part of our ongoing
reporting initiative Chasing the
Dream: Poverty
and Opportunity in America.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Living paycheck
to paycheck
isn't easy. Sometimes, you have
to come up
with creative ways to relieve
the stress.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN, South Dakota:
A good way
to just live in denial is just
throw away
your bills. I know I can't pay
them anyway,
so...
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Kristi
McLaughlin and her
husband, T.J., were getting by
on T.J.'s salary
as a manufacturing plant manager
here in Sioux
Falls, South Dakota, that was,
until T.J.
got sick.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN, South Dakota: I
was working
the night shift, and I was on my
feet a lot.
And I had a couple of wounds
start developing
on my leg. And they were pretty
small at first,
and then they got infected and
just started
growing.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: When T.J. went
to get treatment,
the doctor said it would only
take a day,
but, in fact, he ended up
missing a whole
week of work.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN: They ended up
docking my
pay. We ended up being short on
bills. I panicked,
so...
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: So McLaughlin
came here,
a title loan place just a few
miles from his
home. He says the process was
simple and quick.
They inspected his car and then
handed him
$1,200 in cash. He agreed to pay
$322 a month
for a year.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN: I was making
good money.
I didn't really foresee a
problem paying it
back at that time.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: But then his
leg got worse,
and he had to go back to the
hospital for
another week.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN: And on
Wednesday of the
following week, the H.R. person
called from
his job and fired him, and, on
that day, we
pretty much lost everything.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: But not the
loan. After nine
months, the total amount they
owed grew from
$1,200 to over $3,000. That's an
annual interest
rate of more than 300 percent.
Title loans and payday loans are
supposed
to be short-term quick fixes for
people who
can't get traditional credit.
ACTRESS: Do you need fast cash?
You have come
to the right place.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: They use
high-energy commercials
and bank-like storefronts to
entice people
to borrow money at triple-digit
interest rates.
The problem? They are rarely
short-term. Borrowers
frequently need to take out a
second loan
to pay off the first one. It's
called flipping.
STEVE HICKEY (R), Former South
Dakota State
Legislator: The average payday
loan in the
United States is flipped eight
times. And
they are a debt trap that's
intentionally
marketed to the financially
unsophisticated,
intending to lock them in on
something that
they can't pay back.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Former state
lawmaker Steve
Hickey tried to rein in the
industry, which
charges an average of 574
percent, with legislation
to cap interest rates. But he
could never
get his bills out of committee.
STEVE HICKEY: Just not much
stomach in the
legislature, because the
financial sector
in our state is such a huge
deal. There's
millions and millions at stake.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: South Dakota
has been the
epicenter of high interest since
the 1980s,
when the state repealed laws
capping rates
to attract jobs from credit card
companies
like Wells Fargo and Citibank.
STEVE HICKEY: The purpose at
that time was
to bring in 400 Citibank jobs,
not to bring
in 400 percent interest rates.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Hickey wasn't
alone in recognizing
the problems created by these
short-term loans.
Steve Hildebrand runs Josiah's
coffee shop
here in Sioux Falls. He's seen
the detrimental
effects of these high interest
rates firsthand.
STEVE HILDEBRAND, South Dakotans
for Responsible
Lending: I have had employee
after employee
after employee over the last
three years in
the coffee shop, going through
horrible, horrible
financial experiences, taking
out these emergency
loans, and just getting into
this terrible
cycle of debt that is incredibly
hard for
them to get out of.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Hildebrand, an
openly gay
Democrat who worked on the Obama
campaign,
didn't have much in common with
Hickey, a
Republican and conservative
Christian pastor
who has railed against
homosexuality, but
they did see eye to eye on what
they consider
predatory lending.
STEVE HICKEY: We created a
campaign called
South Dakotans for Responsible
Lending. Steve
and I are chair and co-chair.
It's brought
people on the right and the left
together
in a very healthy way.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: They decided to
use a tactic
that was born right here in the
Mount Rushmore
state in 1898, the ballot
initiative.
REYNOLD NESIBA, South Dakotans
for Responsible
Lending: And you're registered
to vote in
South Dakota?
WOMAN: Yes.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Reynold Nesiba
is a volunteer
gathering signatures to put a
measure on the
ballot that would do what
lawmakers could
not: cap interest rates on all
loans at 36
percent.
REYNOLD NESIBA: And I feel so
strongly about
this that I'm the treasurer of
this campaign,
so that's my name on the bottom.
If you're
registered to vote, I would love
to have your
signature.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: The goal? To
get well more
than the 13,871 signatures
required to put
the issue in front of voters
next November.
With millions of dollars in
revenue at stake,
the lending industry is strongly
opposed to
any new regulation.
Two-thirds of U.S. states allow
some form
of high-interest-rate loans, and
when similar
initiatives have sprung up in
other states,
the industry has fought back.
Here in South
Dakota, the lending industry is
fighting back
using a ballot initiative
itself.
STEVE HILDEBRAND: They were
putting forward
an 18 percent rate cap in order
to convince
people they should sign that
one, instead
of the 36, because 18 sounds
better than 36,
right?
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: By that
initiative comes
with a catch. It only caps rates
at 18 percent
-- quote -- "unless the borrower
agrees to
another rate in writing,"
meaning if the borrower
wants the loan, they have to
agree to whatever
terms the lender demands.
STEVE HILDEBRAND: So, the 18
percent rate
cap is just a fake cap.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Teams of paid
circulators
have been out across the state
gathering signatures
for that petition. None were
willing to speak
with us on camera, and repeated
requests for
comment went unanswered.
When asked about capping rates
at 36 percent,
the one payday lender who did
speak with us
was unequivocal.
CHUCK BRENNAN, CEO, Dollar Loan
Center: It's
a kill-bill for the state. The
entire lending
industry would be out of
business with it.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Chuck Brennan,
a Sioux Falls
native, is the founder and CEO
of Dollar Loan
Center, a chain of more than 90
short-term
lending stores, with 11
locations in South
Dakota.
CHUCK BRENNAN: We have a huge
customer base.
In South Dakota, we have had
over 40,000 applicants
for loans over the years. Over
20 percent
of the state who is over 18 has
applied for
a loan here, which really shows
there's a
need for the product out there.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Further,
Brennan says a rate
cap will actually harm the
people it is intended
to help.
CHUCK BRENNAN: It isn't like
when the industry
goes out of business people are
going to stop
needing money. They're going to
have to turn
to online loans, illegal
sources, and something
that the state can't regulate.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: But Hickey
says, in reality,
there are plenty of ways to help
people who
need money without charging them
triple-digit
interest.
STEVE HICKEY: As an employer
with employees,
I would give a payday advance. I
know Steve
Hildebrand does at his coffee
shop. He will
lend somebody money on their
paycheck at zero
percent interest, and maybe
there could even
be regulation on that. Four
times a year,
it's an employee benefit.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: After months of
hard work,
the campaign gathered over
20,000 signatures
for Hildebrand to deliver to the
secretary
of state. But the opposing
lender-supported
campaign also managed to gather
enough signatures
to get on the ballot.
STEVE HILDEBRAND: The payday
lenders are going
to spend millions of dollars on
television
trying to confuse voters and
misrepresent
our side.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: So, the fight's
not over.
Hildebrand has one year to
convince South
Dakotans to vote for his
interest rate cap.
In the meantime, T.J. ended up
losing his
fight to save his leg. It was
amputated six
months after he lost his job.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN: It needs to
go at least
to there.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: T.J. and Kristi
are now focused
on rehab, instead of the title
loan.
KRISTI MCLAUGHLIN: I told them
to come and
get the car. Take it. You know,
our world
has fallen out from underneath
us, and if
you want it that badly, come and
get it.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: Over
Thanksgiving, the lender
repossessed their car.
T.J. MCLAUGHLIN: People get
sick. And, you
know, if it's serious enough,
they can lose
everything. We lost everything
in a matter
of a week, it seems like.
ANDREW SCHMERTZ: T.J. and Kristi
may have
to find their way out of this
devastation
on their own. But they hope, by
speaking out,
they can at least save other
South Dakotans
from becoming trapped in a
nightmare of high
interest rates.
For the "PBS NewsHour," Andrew
Schmertz in
Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
Now Hari Sreenivasan takes a
broader look
at the problems lower-income
Americans face
when it comes to getting the
money they need.
HARI SREENIVASAN: South Dakota
isn't the only
place where payday loans are
such a big problem.
While a few states have banned
or imposed
strict regulations on these
fringe lenders,
they're ubiquitous in most of
the country.
In fact, there are more payday
lending storefronts
than there are Starbucks and
McDonald's combined.
In her book "How the Other Half
Banks," Mehrsa
Baradaran explores the booming
industry providing
financial services to the poor
at exorbitant
costs and offers some more
equitable solutions.
Thanks for joining us.
So, why -- where is this gap
created? And
why isn't there an incentive for
all banks
to reach out to all people with
money?
MEHRSA BARADARAN, Author, "How
the Other Half
Banks": The gap is fairly new.
So, starting in the 1980s, a lot
of community
banks started shutting down
branches in lower-income
areas, inner-city neighborhoods,
areas where
their profit margins were lower
than in other
areas. And so part of it is,
it's higher cost
to lend to someone or to take a
small deposit
than it is to get a big deposit.
Right? Your
overhead is the same whether
you're, you know,
taking in $100,000 vs. taking in
$500, but
your revenue off of that
$100,000 is much
higher than it is off of that
small deposit.
And so these banks started
leaving these areas.
And part of it is that the
government deregulatory
forces allowed them to merge and
form these
huge conglomerates such as Bank
of America.
So, as these banks leave, they
leave this
void for banking service. And
this is a void
that quickly is filled by these
fringe lenders,
so payday loans, check cashing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, when you
go through
certain cities, just like there
are food deserts
where you don't have a grocery
store, it seems
like there are almost bank
deserts, where
it's populated primarily with
these lenders
that you're talking about.
How much money is there to be
made?
MEHRSA BARADARAN: It's an $89
billion industry
yearly. And it doesn't seem that
way.
So, when you go into these
neighborhoods,
these check cashers or payday
lenders, they
seem like neighborhood joints.
But they're
really sort of multinational
corporations.
They're large, very profitable
organizations.
And they have this, what I call
a facade of
informality, right? So it seems
as though,
look, they speak your language.
They're in
your neighborhood, but, really,
behind them,
there is a lot of bank
financing. These are
very sort of corporate, big, big
firms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: These
companies are going
to say, look, I'm taking a
greater risk. This
is a person that is not as
creditworthy as
someone who maybe walks into a
Bank of America
with a much larger amount of
assets, right,
so shouldn't I be able to charge
a higher
interest rate to get them this
money fast?
MEHRSA BARADARAN: It is
certainly a higher
risk to lend to someone who's
low-income.
However, there's a lot of
studies to show
that the price that they're
actually charging
isn't the cost of the loan. It's
also fairly
misleading when you compare it
to the credit
markets that the middle class
and higher income
have access to.
And one of the big points of the
book is,
even assuming that this is a
market price
that they're charging and it is
the cost of
credit because of the risks and
the defaults,
et cetera, the rest of us don't
pay market
prices for credit.
The credit markets, whether it's
for our mortgages,
our student loans, any sort of
bank credit
you get is heavily subsidized by
the federal
government.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The book is
called "How
the Other Half Banks."
Mehrsa Baradaran, thanks so much
for joining
us.
MEHRSA BARADARAN: Thank you.